Markdown Content
Related information
===================

Publications
------------

All publications for this committee are available on the [Oireachtas
website](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/publications/?q=&date=&term=%2Fie%2Foireachtas%2Fhouse%2Fdail%2F33&fromDate=25%2F01%2F2024&toDate=25%2F01%2F2024&committee%5B%5D=%2Fen%2Fcommittees%2F33%2Fdisability-matters%2F)

Committee videos
----------------

Footage of Committee proceedings can be found on the [Committee videos
page](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/33/disability-matters/videos/).

Contact details
---------------

The contact details for the Committee can be found on the [Committee
page](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/33/disability-matters/#contact).

Terms of reference
------------------

Read the [terms of
reference](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/33/disability-matters/our-role/#terms)
for the Committee.

Committee Membership
====================

Cathaoirleach
-------------

[Michael Moynihan
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Michael-Moynihan.D.1997-06-26/),
Fianna Fáil

Leas-Cathaoirleach
------------------

[Pauline Tully
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Pauline-Tully.D.2020-02-08/),
Sinn Féin

Members 
-------

[Seán Canney
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Se%C3%A1n-Canney.D.2016-10-03/),
Independent

[Dessie Ellis
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Dessie-Ellis.D.2011-03-09/),
Sinn Féin

[Frankie Feighan
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Frank-Feighan.S.2002-09-12/),
Fine Gael

[Gary Gannon
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Gary-Gannon.D.2020-02-08/),
Social Democrats

[Emer Higgins
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Emer-Higgins.D.2020-02-08/),
Fine Gael

[Brian
Leddin](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Brian-Leddin.D.2020-02-08/),
Green Party

[Jennifer Murnane O\'Connor
TD](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Jennifer-Murnane-O'Connor.S.2016-04-25/),
Fianna Fáil

[Senator Tom
Clonan](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Tom-Clonan.S.2022-04-04/),
Independent

[Senator Eileen
Flynn](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Eileen-Flynn.S.2020-06-29/),
Independent

[Senator Erin
McGreehan](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Erin-McGreehan.S.2020-06-29/),
Fianna Fáil

[Senator Fiona
O\'Loughlin](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Fiona-O'Loughlin.D.2016-10-03/),
Fianna Fáil

[Senator Mary Seery
Kearney](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/members/member/Mary-Seery-Kearney.S.2020-06-29/),
Fine Gael

Cathaoirleach's Foreword 
========================

The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is
transformative as it requires a state to apply the human rights
principles from the UN Declaration on Human Rights to the situation of
persons with disabilities. The Convention calls the State to move beyond
anti-discrimination legislation and harmonise all national laws with the
obligations of the Convention.

The Committee has a remit to monitor implementation of the Convention
and progress of the drafting and initiation of required and relevant
legislation. The Committee held a series of public meetings and received
several submissions on the harmonisation of legislation with the
Convention which have informed this report.

Ireland ratified the Convention in 2018 and has yet to ratify the
Optional Protocol. The Committee continue to call for the ratification
of the Optional Protocol which would support a more effective
implementation of the Convention.

More action is needed by the State to mobilise cross sectoral actors and
establish mechanisms to produce rights-based public policy and truly
embed the rights of people with disabilities in Irish society.

The Committee have collectively and actively advocated for the rights of
people with disabilities, particularly regarding raising awareness and
mainstreaming rights across Irish Society. However, a lack of
understanding of the Convention across public bodies and sectors,
prevails.

The Committee recognises all the work that relevant Government
Departments have undertaken over recent years in developing and revising
legislation to allow for greater alignment with the provisions of the
Convention.

I would like to thank all the stakeholders who attended meetings and
those who made submissions to the Committee for their valuable
engagement. Thank you to Committee Members for all their hard work. I
also wish to acknowledge the assistance of the Committee support team in
preparing this report.

**Michael Moynihan T.D.**

Cathaoirleach to the Committee on Disability Matters

Content and format of report
============================

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) is developing indicators for the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD/Convention) which are
beneficial to benchmark progress of a state's implementation of the
Convention[^1].

The structural indicators relating to legislative harmonisation that a
state must introduce to align with the UNCRPD have been reproduced in
this report in a table under each article of the Convention. The
Committee's overall view of Irelands progress against these indicators
has also been highlighted.

Conclusions and recommendations are made under each article of the
Convention, in line with the OHCHR indicators and previous
recommendations of the UNCRPD Committee to other State Parties where
there is a similarity to the position in Ireland. The need for better
implementation of existing legislation or development of new legislative
provisions is also highlighted.

Pre-Legislative scrutiny reports from other Oireachtas Committees have
also informed this report, which are referenced within the document.

It is important to note that this information is not comprehensive and
is presented as a summary for readers. In this regard, it is not, and
should not be taken as, a legal interpretation of any of the referenced
legislation.

The below table highlights the legend used throughout this report;

  Progress legend
  ------------------
  Good progress
  Limited Progress
  No progress
  Regressive

Engagement with stakeholders
============================

In line with its Terms of Reference, available in [related
information](#terms-of-reference), the Joint Committee on Disability
Matters (the Committee) considers the UNCRPD Implementation Plan,
national strategies including the National Disability Inclusion Strategy
(NDIS) and sector strategies for the purpose of monitoring
implementation of the Convention, as well as the progress of initiation
and drafting of required legislation.

The Committee undertook a module of public meetings, 20 and 27 April
2023 examining a rights-based approach to disability legislation and
sought submissions from various stakeholders.

In addition, much of testimony, evidence, and submissions to many other
of the Committee public meetings are also relevant. Please see [Appendix
1](#appendix-1---public-stakeholder-engagement) and [Appendix
2](#appendix-2---written-submissions) for a list of all public meetings
and submissions that informed this report.

Executive Summary
=================

The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities calls on
the State to move beyond anti-discrimination legislation and harmonise
all national laws with the obligations of the Convention and ensure
appropriate economic and social supports to achieve equal access,
participation, and outcomes in all areas of service provision and
employment, including independent needs assessment, services, advocacy,
and redress.

Ireland already has a well-developed infrastructure for mainstreaming
human rights for people with disabilities. The Disability Act 2005
provides the basis through the potential for the re-establishing
sectoral planning, to ensure effective mainstreaming with the outcomes
of the Convention, whether transport accessibility, Universal Designed
housing, community inclusion, employment, or rights-based health.

The Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty 2014 also has the
potential, if strengthened, to ensure that all public bodies are
assessing human rights issues of their service users through meaningful
consultation, and undertaking equality and human rights assessments on
the legislation, policies, and services that they are responsible for to
ensure alignment with the Convention. Disabled Persons Organisations
must be consulted with by public bodies under this duty.

The Committee realise there is much work to be undertaken to improve the
process of public consultation on legislation and policy in Ireland. All
proposed legislation must be subject to public consultation before
introduction in Irish Parliament, and fully inclusive and accessible to
all. This is vital for a truly inclusive democracy.

There is also considerable revisioning and mainstreaming of disability
across health, housing, and community, to enable the outcomes of choice
in independent living with adequate supports, if needed, for people with
disabilities. A right to independent living, a Public Sector Inclusion
Objective that places a duty on all public bodies with regard to Article
19 of the UNCRPD, and a National Accessibility Act with national targets
for Ireland to become truly accessible, will begin to develop a culture
of human rights for people with disabilities in Ireland.

Summary of progress against indicators
======================================

  Article Number   Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Indication of overall progress\*
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------
  1- 4             General provisions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Limited Progress
  5                **Equality and non-discrimination**                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Good Progress
  6                **Women with disabilities**                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Good Progress
  7                **Children with disabilities**                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Limited Progress
  8                **Awareness raising**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Good Progress
  9                **Accessibility**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       No Progress
  10               **Right to Life**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       No Progress
  11               **Situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies**                                                                                                                                                                                                     No Progress
  12               **Equal recognition before the law**                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Good Progress
  13               **Access to justice**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Limited Progress
  14               **Liberty and security of person**                                                                                                                                                                                                                      No Progress
  15, 17           Freedom of torture and [Protecting the integrity of the person](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-17-protecting-the-integrity-of-the-person.html)\*\*                       No Progress
  16               [**Freedom from exploitation, violence, and abuse**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-16-freedom-from-exploitation-violence-and-abuse.html)                                Limited Progress
  18               [**Liberty of movement and nationality**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-18-liberty-of-movement-and-nationality.html)                                                    No Progress
  19               [**Living independently and being included in the community**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-19-living-independently-and-being-included-in-the-community.html)          Regressive
  20               **Personal mobility**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   No Progress
  21               [**Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to information**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-21-freedom-of-expression-and-opinion-and-access-to-information.html)   No Progress
  22               [**Respect for privacy**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-22-respect-for-privacy.html)                                                                                    No Progress
  23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       No Progress
  24               [**Education**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-22-respect-for-privacy.html)                                                                                              Limited Progress
  25               [**Health**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-22-respect-for-privacy.html)                                                                                                 Regressive
  26               [**Habilitation and rehabilitation**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-26-habilitation-and-rehabilitation.html)                                                            Limited Progress
  27               **[Work](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-22-respect-for-privacy.html) and employment**                                                                                    Limited Progress
  28               **Adequate standard of living and social protection**                                                                                                                                                                                                   Limited Progress
  29               **Participation in political and public life**                                                                                                                                                                                                          Limited Progress
  30               **Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure, and sport**                                                                                                                                                                                      Limited Progress
  31               **Statistics and data collection**                                                                                                                                                                                                                      No Progress
  32               **International cooperation**                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Limited Progress
  33               [**National implementation and monitoring**](http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/article-33-national-implementation-and-monitoring.html)                                              Limited Progress

\* Indication of progress is not comprehensive and is presented as a
summary for readers and should not be taken as, a legal interpretation
of any of the referenced legislation.

\*\* Both these articles are included under the one table in the OHCHR
indicators.

Introduction
============

1.  Ireland ratified the UNCRPD on the 20 March 2018. The Irish
    Government is committed to the principles of the Convention, to
    promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all
    human rights and fundamental freedoms by all people with
    disabilities and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.

2.  A human right is about a long-term guarantee, a set of structural
    claims, that include a duty not to deprive a right, a duty to
    protect from deprivation of rights, and a duty to provide aid to
    those who are deprived of their rights[^2]. The OHCHR structural
    indicators measure the acceptance, intent and commitment to human
    rights and reflect enactment of legal instruments and the adoption
    of policies for the implementation of human rights[^3].

3.  Structural discrimination refers to rules, norms, routines, patterns
    of attitudes and behaviour in institutions and other societal
    structures that represent obstacles to groups or individuals in
    achieving the same rights and opportunities that are available to
    the majority of the population[^4]. The prevalence of a medical
    model of disability which treats people with disabilities as medical
    objects who need to be cared for, can sustain the operation of these
    obstacles in society and the exclusion and discrimination of people
    with disabilities.

4.  Implementation of the UNCRPD requires a significant level of
    awareness raising towards the human rights model of disability that
    views people with disabilities as citizens, capable of contributing
    to society, and as rights holders. People with disabilities, also
    need access to human rights training to support capacity building
    considering many individuals have lived segregated lives.

5.  The Committee are aware that the Convention requires State Parties
    to take measures to realise economic, social and cultural rights
    progressively, using the greatest amount of available resources to
    do so, and this obligation acknowledges that it often takes time to
    realise many of these rights fully[^5]. The duty of progressive
    realisation also entails a presumption against retrogressive
    measures in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
    rights[^6]. The Committee are mindful of this duty in its
    consideration of the articles.

6.  The Committee are also aware how important the realisation of
    economic, social, and cultural rights are to enable people with
    disabilities live independent lives in the community. A movement
    towards human rights economy, especially post Covid-19 pandemic, is
    crucial to reinforce and ensure that development, economic,
    industrial and trade policies are guided by human rights norms and
    standards and that no one is left behind[^7].

7.  The Committee have collectively and actively advocated for the
    rights of people with disabilities, particularly with regard to
    raising awareness and mainstreaming the rights of people with
    disabilities across Oireachtas Committees accountability and
    legislative process. People with disabilities and Disabled Persons
    Organisations (DPOs) must be consulted on policy and legislation to
    implement the Convention and there has been a failure with regard to
    the level of consultation in line with the spirit of Article 4 (3)
    of the UNCRPD. The Committee make recommendations under Articles 1-
    4 to improve mainstreaming the rights of people with disabilities in
    the legislative process. It is important that measures are
    introduced that ensure standard consultation by all public bodies.

8.  Ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention (the
    Protocol) supports effective implementation of the UNCRPD and
    therefore Ireland's delay in ratifying the Protocol may impact
    effective implementation. The Department of Children, Equality,
    Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) is scoping the
    requirements for earlier ratification of the Protocol with its legal
    advisors.

9.  The delivery of human rights for people with disabilities was
    considered under the NDIS 2017-2022. However, not all articles of
    the Convention were aligned with this strategy and the Disability
    Stakeholders Group (DSG) highlighted to the Committee the impact of
    the closing of this strategy in 2022 without a successor strategy in
    place. The Committee are concerned about the impact of this on the
    realisation of rights and improving the lives of people with
    disabilities. DCEDIY intend to publish the successor to the NDIS
    which will also include UNCRPD implementation in early 2024 which
    should highlight how the State plans to implement all articles of
    the Convention.

10. As part of the monitoring role of the National Disability Authority
    (NDA), the fifth and final independent assessment of the NDIS was
    published in June 2023[^8]. The Committee also note the lack of
    progress highlighted by the NDA in their assessment and reflect many
    of the gaps in this report.

Articles 1-4 General provisions
===============================

  Indication of overall progress
  --------------------------------
  Limited Progress

  Number   Indicators
  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1        Absence or effective withdrawal of any reservation issued when ratifying or acceding to the CRPD; and/or any interpretative declaration made to provisions of the CRPD which are incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty
  2        Ratification of the Optional Protocol to the CRPD
  3        Adoption of appropriate measure(s) to incorporate the CRPD in the domestic legal order and/or ensure its direct applicability and enforceability by courts
  4        Legislation enacted on the rights of persons with disabilities in line with the purpose, definitions, principles and general obligations of the CRPD
  5        Adoption of a national plan/strategy for legal harmonisation in line with the CRPD
  6        Adoption of a national action plan/strategy for the implementation of the Convention, which includes timeframes, specific indicators and benchmarks, and data collection and disaggregation by disability and resource allocation
  7        Legal and/or statutory appointment of one or more focal points within government (across all branches and levels of government; across all ministries and sectors) with sufficient authority to mainstream the rights of persons with disabilities for implementation of the Convention
  8        With a view to enhancing national implementation, legal and/or statutory appointment of a coordination mechanism within government to facilitate related action in across different sectors and levels, with a clear structure, mandate, leadership, and sufficient authority to ensure mainstreaming and implementation of the Convention
  9        Legal or regulatory provision(s) which establish inclusive and accessible procedures and mechanisms for the involvement of persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, and their representative organizations, across all disability constituencies, in the development and implementation of legislation and policies to implement the Convention
  10       Legislation enacted on the right to freedom of association inclusive of persons with disabilities, including supporting the development of organizations of persons with disabilities, and protection against intimidation, harassment and reprisals, particularly when expressing dissenting opinions
  11       Legal provision(s) requiring allocation of funds from the national budget to financially support the development and strengthening of organizations of persons with disabilities to participate in the development and implementation of legislation and policies to implement the Convention

Conclusions and recommendations
-------------------------------

11. The UNCRPD is the first international, legally binding instrument
    setting minimum standards for the rights of people with
    disabilities. Key to effective implementation of the Convention is
    ensuring representative bodies, DPOs are actively engaged in
    drafting legislation, policy, and in other decision-making processes
    that affect them, as required by Article 4 (3) of the Convention.

12. The Programme for Government outlines a commitment to ratify the
    Protocol to the Convention. Ratification of the Protocol can support
    effective implementation of the UNCRPD allowing public bodies to be
    held to account for the delivery of human rights for people with
    disabilities. The Minister for Children, Equality, Disability,
    Integration and Youth indicated to the Committee that his Department
    is scoping the requirements for earlier ratification of the Protocol
    with its legal advisors and that the decision to ratify will
    ultimately be taken by Cabinet[^9].

13. The Committee are aware of the significant obligations under the
    UNCRPD to engage with persons with disabilities in the legislative
    process, as per Article 4 (3) and the Handbook for Parliamentarians
    on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its
    Optional Protocol[^10]. Currently people with disabilities and DPOs
    are not being consulted as required by Article 4 (3). The Disability
    Participation and Consultation Network (DPCN), established in 2020,
    to facilitate participation by persons with disabilities in the
    policy development process, in its current format, does not satisfy
    the requirements of UNCRPD regarding consultation.

14. The Committee continue to call for additional direct consultation
    with DPOs until such time as the DPCN is developed to align with the
    Convention's requirements. The NDA is undertaking an independent
    evaluation of the DPCN. The Committee look forward to the NDAs
    recommendations to DCEDIY to inform future decision-making in this
    space.

15. The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission's (IHREC) Human
    Rights and Equality Grant which provides grant funding to bodies to
    carry out certain activities to promote human rights and equality in
    Ireland is crucial in this regard. The Committee continue to
    recommend the development of a disability awareness raising strategy
    in line with the human rights model of disability including roll out
    of standard disability awareness and equality and human rights
    training for all public sector staff, as well as across all
    services, in consultation with DPOs.

16. In realising the implementation of the UNCRPD, the Committee heard
    that significant tensions exist between DPO's and Disability Service
    Providers as traditionally the views of the persons with
    disabilities were dismissed in favour of third-party
    representatives.

17. There are several existing mechanisms of engagement on disability
    issues, for example the DSG, DPCN, and IHREC's Disability Advisory
    Committee. The NDA suggests that DCEDIY clarify the role of the
    various stakeholder engagement mechanisms, including setting out in
    more specific terms how DPOs will be involved within the
    implementation and monitoring of the Convention[^11]. The Committee
    support this recommendation.

18. All Government Departments and public bodies have a duty to
    mainstream and protect human rights for people with disabilities
    under the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty (the Duty).
    Throughout public meetings of the Committee it has become clear how
    the Duty provides an effective framework for the realisation of
    human rights for people with disabilities if implemented effectively
    to support rights of people with disabilities as policy
    beneficiaries and service users of a public body.

19. The Committee support IHREC's recommendation to use the Duty as a
    pathway to transition to a human rights-based model of disability.
    The Committee has made recommendations in its report 'Ensuring
    Independent Living and the UNCRPD' regarding oversight and
    accountability of Government Departments and that DCEDIY further
    develop the Duty and consider foregrounding in the UNCRPD
    Implementation Plan. The Committee make further recommendations in
    this report.

20. Legal provision must be strengthened under the Duty to compel all
    public bodies to consult with people with disabilities and DPOs in
    the development of legislation and policies to implement the
    Convention in line with Article 4 (3). A funding stream and supports
    must be developed so that DPOs can access and participate in
    consultations to support them to perform their functions under
    UNCRPD. Funding could be provided by individual departments who are
    seeking consultation as per NDAs Participation Matters
    Guidelines.[^12]

21. There is a requirement to develop disability inclusion and
    mainstreaming in all legislation, policies, and programmes across
    all Government Departments under the Duty. The successor of the
    NDIS, due to be published in 2024 is utilising a mainstreaming
    approach, however there is also a need to develop targeted support
    where necessary and on foot of consultation with people with
    disabilities and DPOs. The United Nations promotes the "twin-track
    approach" for equalising opportunities for persons with
    disabilities, which consists of a balance between mainstreaming
    strategies and targeted-support tailored to address the needs of
    specific communities, but the overall goal should always be
    integrating and including persons with disabilities in all aspects
    of society and development.[^13]

22. Considering the lived reality for people with disabilities and the
    lack of rights-based policy in areas where rights are impacted, the
    Committee believe that there needs to be better coordination between
    Government Departments on policies that impact rights, for example,
    Our Rural Future: Rural Development Policy 2021-2025 and the Roadmap
    for Social Inclusion 2020-2025, and in tandem with the successor to
    the NDIS.

23. IHREC recommends that the human rights model of disability should be
    fully integrated across all relevant legislation, including the
    Disability Act 2005, to ensure harmonisation with the UNCRPD.[^14]

24. The Handbook for Parliamentarians on the Convention on the Rights of
    Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol highlights the
    need to ensure that persons with disabilities are actively engaged
    in drafting legislation and in other decision-making processes that
    affect them and that they should also be encouraged to offer
    observations and guidance when laws are implemented. Parliament,
    through its oversight function, plays a key role in ensuring respect
    for the human rights of persons with disabilities through
    parliamentary committees, commissions of inquiry, direct questioning
    of ministers, scrutiny of executive appointments, oversight over
    non-governmental public agencies and budgetary scrutiny and
    financial control.[^15]

25. People with disabilities have highlighted to the Committee the lack
    of consultation in the legislative process. The Joint Committee on
    Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (JCCEDIY)
    highlighted the failure of meaningful public consultation on the
    Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) Act 2015, milestone legislative
    proposal for people with disabilities, in their pre-legislative
    report on the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill
    2021[^16] as well as the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2023[^17]. The
    strengthening of the Duty should support meaningful participation
    and consultation of persons with disabilities.

26. Most existing Irish legislation which affects people with
    disabilities predates the UNCRPD and needs to be harmonised with the
    Convention. The Irish Judiciary played a significant role over the
    decades in securing rights for children with disabilities,
    particularly with regard to instances of legislative or policy
    failure. The Committee note and welcome that some Departments are
    reviewing the legislation they are responsible for, in line with the
    UNCRPD. However, there is also a need to strengthen implementation
    of legislation to deliver human rights more systematically for
    people with disabilities.

27. To enable harmonisation of existing Irish law with the UNCRPD,
    DCEDIY must consider introducing legislation so that Irish judges
    can have regard to the Convention and make decisions regarding
    compatibility with Irish law, alike the European Convention on Human
    Rights (ECHR) Act 2003. This legislation must also consider
    including a provision for a fast-track mechanism which allows
    Government to immediately amend relevant legislation, where
    necessary. There is also a requirement for adequate and standard
    training to support this role, as the UN committee frequently
    highlights the lack of training for the judiciary, lawyers, and
    other members of the judicial system.[^18] In tandem there is a need
    to ensure adequate consultation with all applicable stakeholders,
    including raising awareness with regard how people with disabilities
    rights are negatively impacted in Ireland.

28. Considering that engaging legislators in post-enactment scrutiny
    strengthens parliament's role in all stages of the legislative
    process and improves legislative scrutiny in general[^19], the
    standardisation of the post legislative scrutiny process to align
    with the principles of the Convention must also be considered, as
    well as other relevant safeguards.

29. In September 2022, the Houses of Oireachtas, under Standing Orders,
    agreed a proposal to create a standard timeframe of eight weeks for
    pre-legislative scrutiny (PLS). People with disabilities and DPOs
    were not being consulted on legislation to implement the Convention
    as required by Article 4 (3) before the eight weeks proposal was
    introduced, and now may be further excluded under the tightened time
    frame. The Committee believe that, under the Duty, the Government
    must develop and streamline the legislative process to make it more
    transparent and inclusive as well as ensuring the level of
    consultation as required by the UNCRPD, like many other countries
    who have undertaken these developments.[^20]

30. To support this, the Houses of Oireachtas Service must ensure
    strengthen implementation of the Duty in the organisation through
    disability inclusion and mainstreaming the rights of persons with
    disabilities across committee's operations as well as promoting
    compliance with the Principles of the Convention. The Houses of
    Oireachtas Service must undertake a review of the current approach
    to mainstreaming disability into committee's operations and build on
    existing work. A policy is also required to strengthen system-wide
    accessibility and ensure mainstreaming of the rights of persons with
    disabilities to implement the UNCRPD as well as the 2030 Agenda for
    Sustainable Development, and other international human rights
    instruments.

31. The Committee also recommend that the Government consider
    introducing provisions to ensure all proposed legislation is subject
    to public consultation before introduction in Irish Parliament.
    Similar initiatives have been introduced in the Scottish
    Parliament.[^21] These provisions must consider that the lead
    Oireachtas committee within whose remit the proposal falls may
    recommend that Parliament not take up the bill if it considers that
    "the consultation on the draft proposal, or the published material
    referred to in the statement of reasons, does not demonstrate a
    reasonable case for the policy objectives of the proposal or does
    not demonstrate that legislation is necessary to achieve those
    policy objectives." A provision like this could mitigate against
    failures in PLS as highlighted by the JCCEDIY with regard their
    scrutiny of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill
    2021 and as discussed further under Article 12.

32. This proposed legislation must include a provision for a
    rights-based disability impact assessment to be undertaken on all
    draft bills to support mainstreaming of disability within sectors,
    in line with the Convention and the Duty. This assessment must be
    published as part of the public consultation to ensure that people
    with disabilities are aware of the impact on their rights. It is
    noted that the guidelines 'How to Conduct a Disability Impact
    Assessment Guidelines for Government Departments' are outdated
    considering these guidelines were published in 2012 prior to
    ratification of the UNCRPD.

33. In tandem the Government must also introduce a centralised portal
    for public consultation that ensures transparency and easy access to
    all open consultations in one place and enables simple commenting on
    all parts of proposed legal acts. This portal must highlight all
    upcoming legislation so that citizens, including people with
    disabilities and DPOs, can plan their resources accordingly. All
    Bills should be published on this platform in line with the NDAs
    Customer Communications Toolkit for the Public Service, A Universal
    Design Approach.[^22]

34. The NDIS ended in 2022, following a one-year extension. There has
    been no overarching policy in place and no real mechanism to support
    progress on actions under this strategy in 2023. The NDA final
    assessment of the NDIS highlights that Departmental Disability
    Consultative Committees (DCCs) are not meeting until such time as a
    new strategy is in place. The DCCs are an important space for
    stakeholder engagement and the sharing of progress updates which is
    now unavailable.[^23] The Committee believe that all Departments
    must establish and maintain a DCC.

35. At its public meeting, 20 September 2023, the Committee heard from
    the NDA and the DSG who are responsible for monitoring the NDIS
    about the lack of accountability, engagement, and commitment in some
    Government Departments. This has led to a standstill in progressing
    human rights for people with disabilities in Ireland.

36. 'The future of human rights is movement....a movement of
    mobilisation, a movement of political process towards accountability
    and empowerment, and a movement towards norms of freedom, dignity,
    and equality'.[^24]

37. More action is needed by the State to mobilise cross sectoral actors
    and establish mechanisms to produce rights-based public policy and
    truly embed the rights of people with disabilities in Irish society.
    Commencement of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) Act 2015 is
    a milestone in the promotion of human rights and equality for people
    with disabilities, especially those with intellectual disabilities,
    and marks a real beginning in terms of change.

### The Committee recommends

+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Number | Recommendation                                             |
+========+============================================================+
| 1      | The State must ratify the Optional Protocol before the     |
|        | cessation of the 33rd Dáil session.                        |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2      | Incorporation of the UNCRPD into Irish Law similar to that |
|        | of the European Convention on Human Rights Act 2003 and    |
|        | including adequate consultation across all relevant        |
|        | stakeholders.                                              |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3      | A review of the Disability Act 2005 and consider the       |
|        | provision of a right to live independently with access to  |
|        | rights-based services in the community including the       |
|        | creation of a statutory Public Sector Inclusion Objective  |
|        | that places a duty on all public bodies to deliver         |
|        | independent living (Article 19 UNCRPD). As an interim      |
|        | measure, reactivate the use of sectoral plans as provided  |
|        | for under Part 3 of the Disability Act 2005 as a statutory |
|        | obligation under UNCRPD implementation.                    |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4      | The Government must immediately develop public             |
|        | consultation in the legislative process in line with the   |
|        | Convention and;                                            |
|        |                                                            |
|        | a)  introduce provisions to ensure all proposed            |
|        |     legislation is subject to public consultation in line  |
|        |     with Article 4 (3) before introduction in Irish        |
|        |     Parliament.                                            |
|        |                                                            |
|        | b)  develop and introduce a centralised portal for public  |
|        |     consultation that ensures transparency and easy access |
|        |     to all open consultations including public             |
|        |     consultation intended by the Oireachtas.               |
|        |                                                            |
|        | c)  mandate a rights-based disability impact assessment as |
|        |     a standard across all proposed policy and legislation  |
|        |     and published as part of the public consultation.      |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5      | The Houses of Oireachtas Service must strengthen           |
|        | implementation of the Public Sector Equality and Human     |
|        | Rights Duty and ensure disability inclusion and mainstream |
|        | the rights of persons with disabilities across Oireachtas  |
|        | Committees operations by;                                  |
|        |                                                            |
|        | a)  undertaking a review of the Oireachtas Committees      |
|        |     current approach to mainstreaming disability into      |
|        |     operations in advance of the next Dáil session         |
|        |                                                            |
|        | b)  develop a policy to promote compliance with the        |
|        |     Principles of the Convention and the 2030 Agenda for   |
|        |     Sustainable Development, and other international human |
|        |     rights instruments.                                    |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6      | Departments must develop an intersectional approach and    |
|        | strengthen their collaboration in this regard in relation  |
|        | to policy and proposed legislation that impacts human      |
|        | rights for people with disabilities.                       |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7      | The Government must further develop the Public Sector      |
|        | Equality and Human Rights Duty including strengthening     |
|        | compliance mechanisms on all public bodies in line with    |
|        | the UNCRPD and Article 4 (3) as well strengthening the     |
|        | application of the Universal Design principals across all  |
|        | public bodies.                                             |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------------+

Article 5 Equality and non-discrimination
=========================================

  Indication of overall progress
  --------------------------------
  Good Progress

  Number   Indicators
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1        National constitutional provisions adopted, and legislation enacted recognising the right to equality and non-discrimination of persons with disabilities, including the right to be provided with reasonable accommodation and the duty to adopt specific measures to achieve de facto equality
  2        Adoption of a national strategy and/or plan for equality of all persons with disabilities, in particular the groups more at risk of discrimination
  3        Legal or statutory requirement to collect and publish data disaggregated by disability across all sectors (health, employment, education, violence, access to justice, political participation, among others), including enrolment rate, employment rate, access to health services, victims of violence, complaints on discrimination lodged, etc.)
  4        Legal requirement to establish a marker on all public spending to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities
  5        Relevant thematic legislation enacted explicitly prohibiting discrimination on the basis of disability and providing legal remedies for all forms of discrimination
  6        Specific theme/target within national strategy/plan for equality of all persons with disabilities, which ensures the availability of technical guidance, financial incentives and budgetary resources for the provision of reasonable accommodation by public and private actors

Conclusions and recommendations
-------------------------------

38. People with disabilities are equal citizens in Irish law. IHREC
    highlights that people with disabilities in Ireland experience
    higher rates of discrimination than people without disabilities,
    with on average 15% of people with disabilities experiencing
    discrimination compared to 11% of those without a disability. IHREC
    further note that discrimination is mostly experienced in the health
    services followed by the private sector (e.g., financial
    institutions, housing, shops, pubs, and restaurants) where people
    with disabilities were 65% more likely to experience discrimination
    than those without disabilities.[^25] More than 40% of queries about
    equality issues received by IHREC in 2022 were linked to disability
    discrimination, according to its annual report.[^26]

39. It is crucial that all legislation is reviewed through the equality
    lens and reformed in line with a modern human rights framework.

40. Equality budgeting was introduced in Ireland on a pilot basis in
    2017 as part of a commitment in the Programme for a Partnership
    Government (May 2016) to "develop the process of budget and policy
    proofing as a means of advancing equality, reducing poverty, and
    strengthening economic and social rights".[^27]

41. The Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) undertook an 'Analysis of
    Equality Budgeting Content in the Revised Estimates for Public
    Services 2023'. This analysis highlights that Gender Equality
    Metrics are reported by only 12 out of 45 Votes (26%), with the
    highest number of metrics reported by Department of Enterprise,
    Trade and Employment. Disability metrics are reported by only 7 out
    of 45 Votes (15%), with the highest number of metrics reported by
    Department of Health.[^28]

42. The Committee welcome that the Department of Health are leading with
    the highest number of metrics with regard disability. The Committee
    are concerned that there is a noticeable absence of
    intersectionality[^29] and therefore a lack of progress with regard
    ensuring equality, reducing poverty, and strengthening economic and
    social rights for people with disabilities, especially women with
    disabilities. The Committee continue to recommend that Equality
    Budgeting be developed to deliver CRPD compliant budgeting and that
    all Departments update their budgetary key metrics accordingly and
    in line with CRPD compliant budgeting.

43. IHREC highlights that under the Employment Equality Acts 1998 --
    2015, direct discrimination is when a worker is treated less well
    than another worker in the same situation or circumstances under any
    of the nine grounds covered in the Acts. Direct discrimination can
    also be, for example, an order given by a manager to a worker to
    discriminate against another worker. Indirect discrimination happens
    where a worker or group of workers or job applicants are treated
    less favourably as a result of requirements that they might find
    hard to satisfy.[^30] This clearly highlights how structural
    discrimination embedded in Irish institutions can result in
    obstacles to people with disabilities in achieving the same rights
    and opportunities that are available to the majority of the
    population.

44. Evidence provided to the Committee defines a "reasonable
    accommodation\" as individually suited measures or tailored measures
    to the needs of the individual. The NDA carried out research in 2019
    on cases taken to the Workplace Relations Court (WRC) in respect of
    reasonable accommodations and found that where employers had been
    found against, was often because they had not followed due process
    or had a discussion with the individual requiring the accommodation.

45. IHREC and the NDA both highlighted the need for strengthening
    provisions regarding reasonable accommodations.[^31] The DPO Network
    highlighted concern that under the Employment Equality Acts, the
    denial or refusal of reasonable accommodation by an employer or a
    prospective employer does not currently constitute an act of
    discrimination. The UNCRPD expressly describes the denial of
    reasonable accommodation as a form of discrimination.

46. There is a need to review the Employment Equality Acts and the Equal
    Status Acts with regard intersectional discrimination and how an
    individualised approach can be strengthened to assessment under the
    reasonable accommodation process. Consideration of funding under the
    Equal Status Act for those with limited resources and an amendment
    to provide that denial of reasonable accommodation is discriminatory
    is also necessary. Exemptions to the prohibition of discrimination
    in the Employment Equality Acts also need to be reviewed,
    particularly the removal of Section 35(1) on different rates of
    remuneration for disabled people.

47. There is also a requirement to establish an accurate system of data
    collection regarding the number of complaints received and dealt
    with by the institutions tasked with monitoring discrimination,
    including the complaints process under the Equality Acts. This data
    should be in the public domain.

48. As referred to previously under Article 1-4, the Public Sector
    Equality and Human Rights Duty can be used as a framework to realise
    human rights for people with disabilities, and the importance of
    this was highlighted to the Committee during proceedings. Section 42
    of the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 2014 requires
    each public body to develop its public sector duty by consulting
    with staff and service users, assessing issues related to equality
    and human rights, putting effective plans in place that will measure
    those, and reporting on them annually. However, antidiscrimination
    legislation often lacks adequate enforcement which can undermine the
    effectiveness of the legislation.

49. The NDA highlighted that the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights
    Duty could be used as an indicator within a monitoring framework for
    the UNCRPD implementation strategy.

50. DCEDIY are developing a National Equality Data Strategy in
    conjunction with the Central Statistics Office (CSO) which will
    allow for better measurement of the effectiveness of policies and
    legislation in terms of challenging discrimination, promoting
    equality, and protecting human rights. This work is a crucial step
    towards enhancing evidence-informed policy for the effective
    implementation of the UNCRPD.[^32] As highlighted by the Global
    Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, 'intersectional
    approaches to data identify inequality within and between groups of
    people based on the way multiple facets of an individual\'s identify
    interact. They ensure that data contributes to the reduction of
    inequality'.[^33]

### The Committee recommends

  Number   Recommendation
  -------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  8        Developing the Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty to include equality considerations regarding the operation of legislation, as well as the design of policies and delivery of services, and strengthening enforcement mechanisms to ensure compliance.
  9        The Employment Equality Acts must be reviewed to align with Article 5 of the UNCRPD and to better combat discrimination and promote equality.
  10       DCEDIY must ensure an accurate and intersectional approach to data collection, including consultation with DPOs regarding the National Equality Data Strategy for identifying current gaps in equality data and solutions on how to fill those gaps.
  11       DCEDIY must establish an accurate system of data collection about the number of complaints received and dealt with by the institutions tasked with monitoring discrimination, including the complaints process under the Employment Equality Acts, and that this data is available in the public domain.
  12       Equality Budgeting must be developed to deliver CRPD compliant budgeting, and all Government Departments must update their budgetary key metrics to include disability metrics.

Appendix 1 - Public stakeholder engagement
==========================================

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Date of public       | Meeting topic        | Witnesses            |
| meeting and          |                      |                      |
| transcript           |                      |                      |
+======================+======================+======================+
| [10 March            | Enabling Financial   | -   Representatives  |
| 2022](http           | Independence for     |     from Disabled    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | Women with           |     Women Ireland,   |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | Disabilities         |     Amy Hassett,     |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Co-Director, Nem |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Kearns, Board    |
| matters/2022-03-10/d |                      |     Secretary &      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Aoife Price,     |
|                      |                      |     Partnerships &   |
|                      |                      |     Outreach Lead    |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Independent |
|                      |                      |     Living Movement  |
|                      |                      |     Ireland, Paula   |
|                      |                      |     Soraghan &       |
|                      |                      |     Nicola Meacle    |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [28 April            | Situations of Risk   | -   Representatives  |
| 2022](http           | and Humanitarian     |     from European    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | Emergencies -        |     Disability       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | (Article 11)         |     Forum, Catherine |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Naughton,        |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Director         |
| matters/2022-04-28/d |                      |                      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      | -   Dr Mary Keogh,   |
|                      |                      |     Advocacy         |
|                      |                      |     Director, CBM    |
|                      |                      |     Global           |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [05 May              | Situations of risk   | -   Dr. Rosaleen     |
| 2022](http           | and humanitarian     |     McDonagh IHREC   |
| s://data.oireachtas. | emergencies, Article |     Member           |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | 11 - resumed         |                      |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      | -   Representatives  |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     from WALK, Joe   |
| matters/2022-05-05/d |                      |     Mason CEO,       |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Catherine Kelly  |
|                      |                      |     Deputy CEO &     |
|                      |                      |     Olena Dmytriieva |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from AsIAm, Adam |
|                      |                      |     Harris, CEO      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [01 December         | Disability inclusive | -   Representatives  |
| 2022](http           | participation in     |     from European    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | political and public |     Disability       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | life                 |     Forum, Pat       |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Clarke, Vice     |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     President        |
| matters/2022-12-01/d |                      |                      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Disability  |
|                      |                      |     Stakeholder      |
|                      |                      |     Group, Annette   |
|                      |                      |     Costello, Robbie |
|                      |                      |     Sinnott, John    |
|                      |                      |     Dolan & Ciarán   |
|                      |                      |     Delaney          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [19 January          | UNCRPD               | -   Roderic          |
| 2023](http           | Implementation and   |     O\'Gorman T.D.,  |
| s://data.oireachtas. | the Optional         |     Minister for     |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | Protocol (resumed)   |     Children,        |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Equality,        |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Disability,      |
| matters/2023-01-19/d |                      |     Integration and  |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Youth            |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     DCEDIY, Colm     |
|                      |                      |     O'Conaill,       |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Secretary        |
|                      |                      |     General, Niall   |
|                      |                      |     Brunell,         |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Tara    |
|                      |                      |     Smith, Assistant |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer & John   |
|                      |                      |     Gilbane,         |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [02 February         | Public awareness of  | -   Catherine        |
| 2023](http           | living with a        |     Gallagher, PhD   |
| s://data.oireachtas. | disability           |     student and      |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Disability       |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Activist         |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |                      |
| matters/2023-02-02/d |                      | ```{=html}           |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Family      |
|                      |                      |     Carers Ireland,  |
|                      |                      |     Catherine Cox,   |
|                      |                      |     Head of          |
|                      |                      |     Communications   |
|                      |                      |     and Carer        |
|                      |                      |     Engagement &     |
|                      |                      |     Jane Johnstone,  |
|                      |                      |     Caring Employers |
|                      |                      |     Promotions       |
|                      |                      |     Officer & Family |
|                      |                      |     Carer            |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [16 February         | Disability proofing  | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | and data             |     from The Central |
| s://data.oireachtas. |                      |     Statistics       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Office, Cormac   |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Halpin, Census   |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Outputs          |
| matters/2023-02-16/d |                      |     Division, Kieran |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Culhane,         |
|                      |                      |     Statistical      |
|                      |                      |     System           |
|                      |                      |     Coordination     |
|                      |                      |     Unit & Fiona     |
|                      |                      |     O'Riordan,       |
|                      |                      |     Social Data      |
|                      |                      |     Collection       |
|                      |                      |     division         |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from DPO         |
|                      |                      |     Network, Jacqui  |
|                      |                      |     Browne, Chair &  |
|                      |                      |     Grace Murphy,    |
|                      |                      |     member, Amy      |
|                      |                      |     Hassett, member  |
|                      |                      |     & Nem Kearns,    |
|                      |                      |     member           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Irish Human |
|                      |                      |     Rights and       |
|                      |                      |     Equality         |
|                      |                      |     Commission       |
|                      |                      |     (IHREC), Sinéad  |
|                      |                      |     Gibney, Chief    |
|                      |                      |     Commissioner &   |
|                      |                      |     Dr Iris Elliot,  |
|                      |                      |     Head of Policy   |
|                      |                      |     and Research     |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [09 March            | Self-Advocacy and    | -   Eliona Gjecaj,   |
| 2023](http           | Women with           |     Disability       |
| s://data.oireachtas. | disabilities         |     activist and     |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     researcher       |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |                      |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      | -   Representatives  |
| matters/2023-03-09/d |                      |     from Disabled    |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Women Ireland,   |
|                      |                      |     Amy Hassett,     |
|                      |                      |     Co-director, Nem |
|                      |                      |     Kearns,          |
|                      |                      |     Co-director &    |
|                      |                      |     Sarah McNabb,    |
|                      |                      |     Steering Group   |
|                      |                      |     Member/          |
|                      |                      |     Campaigns Lead   |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Inclusion   |
|                      |                      |     Ireland, Derval  |
|                      |                      |     McDonagh, Chief  |
|                      |                      |     Executive        |
|                      |                      |     Officer & Una    |
|                      |                      |     Coates,          |
|                      |                      |     Spokesperson &   |
|                      |                      |     Chairperson of   |
|                      |                      |     Inclusion        |
|                      |                      |     Ireland's Self   |
|                      |                      |     Advocacy         |
|                      |                      |     Committee        |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [30 March            | Leave no one behind: | -   Officials from   |
| 2023](http           | Climate crisis and   |     Dept. of         |
| s://data.oireachtas. | disability           |     Environment,     |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Climate and      |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Communications,  |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Dr Robert        |
| matters/2023-03-30/d |                      |     Mooney,          |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal,       |
|                      |                      |     Climate          |
|                      |                      |     Engagement and   |
|                      |                      |     Adaption         |
|                      |                      |     Division &       |
|                      |                      |     Hannah           |
|                      |                      |     Gilmartin,       |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal,       |
|                      |                      |     Climate          |
|                      |                      |     Engagement and   |
|                      |                      |     Adaption         |
|                      |                      |     Division         |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Independent |
|                      |                      |     Living Movement  |
|                      |                      |     Ireland (ILMI),  |
|                      |                      |     Damien Walshe,   |
|                      |                      |     Chief Executive  |
|                      |                      |     & Peter Kearns,  |
|                      |                      |     Onside Project   |
|                      |                      |     Manager          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [20 April            | Rights-Based         | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | Approach and         |     from National    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | Disability           |     Disability       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | Legislation          |     Authority, Dr    |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Aideen Hartney,  |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Director, Dr     |
| matters/2023-04-20/d |                      |     Rosalyn Tamming, |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Head of Policy,  |
|                      |                      |     Research &       |
|                      |                      |     Public Affairs & |
|                      |                      |     Mr Dharragh      |
|                      |                      |     Hunt, Senior     |
|                      |                      |     Policy Advisor   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [27 April            | Rights-Based         | -   Officials from   |
| 2023](http           | Approach and         |     DCEDIY, Colm Ó   |
| s://data.oireachtas. | Disability           |     Conaill,         |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | Legislation          |     Assistant        |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Secretary,       |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Disability &     |
| matters/2023-04-27/d |                      |     Youth, Niall     |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Brunell,         |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer,         |
|                      |                      |     Disability       |
|                      |                      |     Equality Policy  |
|                      |                      |     team, Jason      |
|                      |                      |     Doran, Assistant |
|                      |                      |     Principal,       |
|                      |                      |     Children's       |
|                      |                      |     Services team &  |
|                      |                      |     Eithne           |
|                      |                      |     Fitzgerald,      |
|                      |                      |     Disability       |
|                      |                      |     Adviser,         |
|                      |                      |     Disability &     |
|                      |                      |     Youth Division.  |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     Dept. of         |
|                      |                      |     Education,       |
|                      |                      |     Martina Mannion, |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Secretary,       |
|                      |                      |     Martin           |
|                      |                      |     McLoughlin,      |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education, Frank |
|                      |                      |     Hanlon,          |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education &      |
|                      |                      |     Brendan Doody,   |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education        |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [01 June             | DPO's and the        | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](https://www.oi | implementation of    |     from Disability  |
| reachtas.ie/en/debat | the UNCRPD (resumed) |     Power Ireland,   |
| es/debate/joint_comm |                      |     Maryam Madani,   |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Chair/Founder &  |
| matters/2023-06-01/) |                      |     Peadar O\'Dea,   |
|                      |                      |     Policy Officer   |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from DPO         |
|                      |                      |     Network, Dr.     |
|                      |                      |     James Casey,     |
|                      |                      |     Independent      |
|                      |                      |     Living Movement  |
|                      |                      |     Ireland, Joe     |
|                      |                      |     McGrath,         |
|                      |                      |     National         |
|                      |                      |     Platform for     |
|                      |                      |     Self-Advocates & |
|                      |                      |     John Sherwin,    |
|                      |                      |     CEO, Irish Deaf  |
|                      |                      |     Society          |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Physical    |
|                      |                      |     Impairment       |
|                      |                      |     Ireland (PII),   |
|                      |                      |     Peter Gohery,    |
|                      |                      |     National         |
|                      |                      |     Chairperson &    |
|                      |                      |     Leo Kavanagh,    |
|                      |                      |     Member           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Voice of    |
|                      |                      |     Vision           |
|                      |                      |     Impairment, Dr.  |
|                      |                      |     Robert Sinnott,  |
|                      |                      |     Co-Ordinator     |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Frances Quan     |
|                      |                      |     Farrant,         |
|                      |                      |     Disability and   |
|                      |                      |     Human Rights     |
|                      |                      |     Advocate         |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [06 July             | Increasing           | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | employment           |     from European    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | participation --     |     Disability       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | career progression   |     Forum, Haydn     |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Hammersley,      |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Social Policy    |
| matters/2023-07-06/d |                      |     Coordinator      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     Dept. of Social  |
|                      |                      |     Protection,      |
|                      |                      |     Fiona Ward,      |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Secretary,       |
|                      |                      |     Employment       |
|                      |                      |     Services, Tadgh  |
|                      |                      |     O'Leary          |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer,         |
|                      |                      |     Contracted       |
|                      |                      |     Services &       |
|                      |                      |     Annette Conroy   |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer,         |
|                      |                      |     Employment       |
|                      |                      |     Services Policy  |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [13 July             | Increasing           | -   Eddie Hennessy   |
| 2023](https://www.oi | employment           |                      |
| reachtas.ie/en/debat | participation --     | -   Representatives  |
| es/debate/joint_comm | self-employment and  |     from             |
| ittee_on_disability_ | entrepreneurship for |     Technological    |
| matters/2023-07-13/) | people with          |     University       |
|                      | disabilities         |     Dublin, Prof.    |
|                      |                      |     Thomas M.        |
|                      |                      |     Cooney,          |
|                      |                      |     Professor of     |
|                      |                      |     Entrepreneurship |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Access      |
|                      |                      |     Earth, Matt      |
|                      |                      |     McCann, Chief    |
|                      |                      |     Executive        |
|                      |                      |     Officer          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [20 September        | National Disability  | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | Inclusion Strategy   |     from National    |
| s://data.oireachtas. | (resumed)            |     Disability       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Authority, Dr.   |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Aideen Hartney,  |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Director & Dr    |
| matters/2023-09-20/d |                      |     Rosalyn Tamming, |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Head of Policy,  |
|                      |                      |     Research and     |
|                      |                      |     Public Affairs   |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Disability  |
|                      |                      |     Stakeholder      |
|                      |                      |     Group (DSG),     |
|                      |                      |     Renée            |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |    Dempsey-Clifford, |
|                      |                      |     Independent      |
|                      |                      |     Chair & Dharragh |
|                      |                      |     Hunt, Secretary  |
|                      |                      |     to DSG           |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [27 September        | Accessibility        | -   Officials from   |
| 2023](https://www.oi |                      |     Dept. of         |
| reachtas.ie/en/debat |                      |     Transport,       |
| es/debate/joint_comm |                      |     Garret Doocey,   |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Assistant        |
| matters/2023-09-27/) |                      |     Secretary, Land  |
|                      |                      |     Transport, John  |
|                      |                      |     Boylan,          |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Public  |
|                      |                      |     Transport &      |
|                      |                      |     Akriti Brady,    |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal,       |
|                      |                      |     Accessibility    |
|                      |                      |     and Rural        |
|                      |                      |     Transport        |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from National    |
|                      |                      |     Transport        |
|                      |                      |     Authority (NTA), |
|                      |                      |     Anne Graham,     |
|                      |                      |     Chief Executive  |
|                      |                      |     Officer & Hugh   |
|                      |                      |     Creegan, Deputy  |
|                      |                      |     Chief Executive  |
|                      |                      |     Officer          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [04 October          | Enhanced Transport   | -   Anne Rabbitte,   |
| 2023](http           | and Mobility Support |     Minister of      |
| s://data.oireachtas. | Options for People   |     State at the     |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | with Disabilities    |     Department of    |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Health and at    |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     the DCEDIY       |
| matters/2023-10-04/d |                      |                      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     DCEDIY, Deirdre  |
|                      |                      |     Comiskey,        |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer,         |
|                      |                      |     Disability       |
|                      |                      |     Children's       |
|                      |                      |     Services Unit,   |
|                      |                      |     Tara Smith,      |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal,       |
|                      |                      |     Disability       |
|                      |                      |     Equality Policy  |
|                      |                      |     Unit & Donie     |
|                      |                      |     O'Shea, Equality |
|                      |                      |     Policy Advisor   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [11 October          | International        | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | co-operation: UNCRPD |     from CBM Global  |
| s://data.oireachtas. | and the 2030 agenda  |     Dualta           |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb | for sustainable      |     Roughneen, CEO,  |
| ateRecord/joint_comm | development          |     & Mahbub Kabir,  |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Advocacy Manager |
| matters/2023-10-11/d |                      |                      |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from Irish Aid,  |
|                      |                      |     Department of    |
|                      |                      |     Foreign Affairs, |
|                      |                      |     Michael Gaffey,  |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |    Director-General, |
|                      |                      |     Irish Aid,       |
|                      |                      |     Anderson Finlay, |
|                      |                      |     First Secretary, |
|                      |                      |     Human Rights     |
|                      |                      |     Unit, Political  |
|                      |                      |     Division & Dr    |
|                      |                      |     Sarah Hunt,      |
|                      |                      |     Director of      |
|                      |                      |     Policy Unit at   |
|                      |                      |     Irish Aid        |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | ```{=html}           |
|                      |                      | <!-- -->             |
|                      |                      | ```                  |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     Dept. of         |
|                      |                      |     Environment,     |
|                      |                      |     Climate and      |
|                      |                      |     Communications,  |
|                      |                      |     Niall            |
|                      |                      |     McLoughlin,      |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer & Fiona  |
|                      |                      |     McManus,         |
|                      |                      |     Assistant        |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [18 October          | Implementing         | -   Officials from   |
| 2023](http           | inclusive education  |     Dept. of         |
| s://data.oireachtas. | in schools           |     Education,       |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Martina Mannion, |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Assistant        |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Secretary,       |
| matters/2023-10-18/d |                      |     Inclusion        |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Division,        |
|                      |                      |     Brendan Doody,   |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education        |
|                      |                      |     Section, Frank   |
|                      |                      |     Hanlon,          |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education        |
|                      |                      |     Section, Martin  |
|                      |                      |     McLoughlin,      |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Special |
|                      |                      |     Education        |
|                      |                      |     Section          |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Officials from   |
|                      |                      |     Dept. of         |
|                      |                      |     Education, Jill  |
|                      |                      |     Fannin,          |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Teacher |
|                      |                      |     Education        |
|                      |                      |     Section &        |
|                      |                      |     Gráinne Cullen,  |
|                      |                      |     Principal        |
|                      |                      |     Officer, Social  |
|                      |                      |     Inclusion Unit   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [25 October          | Ensuring inclusive   | -   Representatives  |
| 2023](http           | local and EU         |     from Disability  |
| s://data.oireachtas. | elections            |     Federation of    |
| ie/ie/oireachtas/deb |                      |     Ireland, John    |
| ateRecord/joint_comm |                      |     Dolan, Chief     |
| ittee_on_disability_ |                      |     Executive        |
| matters/2023-10-25/d |                      |     Officer & Joan   |
| ebate/mul@/main.pdf) |                      |     Carthy           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | -   Representatives  |
|                      |                      |     from An          |
|                      |                      |     Coimisiún        |
|                      |                      |     Toghcháin, The   |
|                      |                      |     Electoral        |
|                      |                      |     Commission, Art  |
|                      |                      |     O' Leary, Chief  |
|                      |                      |     Executive & Dr   |
|                      |                      |     Mary Clare O'    |
|                      |                      |     Sullivan, Head   |
|                      |                      |     of Electoral     |
|                      |                      |     Integrity and    |
|                      |                      |     Research         |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Appendix 2 - Written Submissions
================================

  Reference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Topic                                              Submitter
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [JCDM-r674](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-20_submission-disability-power-ireland_en.pdf)                                                     Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   Disability Power Ireland
  [JCDM-r675](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-20_submission-dpo-network_en.pdf)                                                                  Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   DPO Network
  [JCDM-r676](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-20_submission-voice-of-vision-impairment_en.pdf)                                                   Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   Voice of Vision Impairment
  [JCDM-r677](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-20_submission-prof-eilionoir-flynn-nuig_en.pdf)                                                    Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   Prof. Eilionóir Flynn NUIG
  [JCDM-r747](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-27_submission-department-of-health_en.pdf)                                                         Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   Department of Health
  [JCDM-r748](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-04-27_submission-department-of-further-and-higher-education-research-innovation-and-science_en.pdf)   Rights-Based Approach and Disability Legislation   Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science
  [JCDM-r827](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2024/2024-01-30_submission-access-earth_en.pdf)                                                                 Accessibility                                      Access Earth

[^1]: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
    '*Human Rights indicators on the Convention on the Rights of Persons
    with Disabilities in support of a disability inclusive 2030 Agenda
    for Sustainable Development'.* Available at*:* [Human Rights
    indicators on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
    Disabilities in support of a disability inclusive 2030 Agenda for
    Sustainable Development \|
    OHCHR](https://www.ohchr.org/en/disabilities/human-rights-indicators-convention-rights-persons-disabilities-support-disability-inclusive-2030#Indicators)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024)

[^2]: P. Uvin (2004), *'Human Rights and Development',* Kumarian
    Press:Bloomfield.

[^3]: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
    (2020), *'Frequently Asked Questions on the human rights indicators
    on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
    (CRPD)*'. Available at: [CRPD Indicators FAQs
    (ohchr.org)](https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/crpd-indicators-frequently-asked-questions.pdf)
    Accessed 08 January 2024.

[^4]: Najcevska, M. (2009, October 18), '*Structural Discrimination --
    Definition, Approaches and Trends*', Presented at the 8th Session of
    the UN Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent.
    Available here:
    [Link](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwi3ppLU5M2DAxXiQEEAHaRCSUQFnoECA4QAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ohchr.org%2FDocuments%2FIssues%2FRacism%2FIWG%2FSession8%2FMirjanaNajcevska.doc&usg=AOvVaw3HOvKPJMgisMG-RjBy4o7o&opi=89978449)
    Accessed 08 January 2024.

[^5]: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
    Disability, '*Handbook for Parliamentarians on the Convention on the
    Rights of Persons with Disabilities'.* Available at: [Chapter Two:
    The Convention in detail -- Obligations of States parties under the
    Convention \| United Nations
    Enable](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/resources/handbook-for-parliamentarians-on-the-convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/chapter-two-the-convention-in-detail-4.html).
    Accessed 08 January 2024.

[^6]: United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with
    Disabilities, (2017), CRPD/C/GC/5, 'General comment on article 19:
    Living independently and being included in the community'.

[^7]: Universal Periodic Review Info (2023), *'Integrating a human
    rights economy in public policies including side event sponsored by
    the Permanent Mission of Portugal, entitled "Towards a human rights
    economy: UPR recommendations for ESCR"*. Available at: [Integrating
    a human rights economy in public policies \| UPR info
    (upr-info.org)](https://www.upr-info.org/en/news/integrating-human-rights-economy-public-policies#:~:text=Human%20rights%20economy%20seeks%20to,no%20one%20is%20left%20behind.).
    Accessed 08 January 2024.

[^8]: NDA (2023), *'2022 NDA Independent assessment of implementation of
    the NDIS*.' Available at: [NDA Independent assessment of
    implementation of the NDIS - National Disability
    Authority](https://nda.ie/publications/nda-independent-assessment-of-implementation-of-the-ndis).
    Accessed 24 January 2024.

[^9]: Joint Committee on Disability Matters (2023), [Opening Remarks by
    Minister Roderic O'Gorman,
    TD](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_disability_matters/submissions/2023/2023-01-19_opening-statement-roderic-o-gorman-t-d-minister-department-of-children-equality-disability-integration-and-youth_en.pdf)
    , Public Meeting, 19 January 2023.

[^10]: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
    Disability, '*Handbook for Parliamentarians on the Convention on the
    Rights of Persons with Disabilities'*.

[^11]: NDA (2023), *'2022 NDA Independent assessment of implementation
    of the NDIS*.' pp. 51.

[^12]: NDA (2022), '*Participation Matters Guidelines on implementing
    the obligation to meaningfully engage with disabled people in public
    decision making'.*

[^13]: United Nations Economic and Social Council (2011),
    *'Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda'* Available at:
    [Link](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjwosmS8s2DAxWWU0EAHRp2CSsQFnoECBAQAw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fdisabilities%2Fdocuments%2Freports%2Fe_cn5_2012_6.doc%23%3A~%3Atext%3DThe%2520twin%252Dtrack%2520approach%2520to%2520mainstreaming%2520disability%2520captures%2520one%2520of%2Cagents%2520and%2520beneficiaries%2520of%2520development.&usg=AOvVaw0q8w4j2Kbwc3J0nNLAREzL&opi=89978449).
    Accessed 08 January 2024

[^14]: IHREC (2021), '*Submission on the Review of the Equality Acts'*,
    Available at:
    [IHREC-Submission-on-the-Review-of-the-Equality-Acts.pdf](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/01/IHREC-Submission-on-the-Review-of-the-Equality-Acts.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024)

[^15]: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
    Disability, *'Handbook for Parliamentarians on the Convention on the
    Rights of Persons with Disabilities'.*

[^16]: Joint Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration
    and Youth (2022), *'Pre-legislative report on the Assisted Decision
    Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2021'.* Available at:
    [Link](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_children_equality_disability_integration_and_youth/reports/2022/2022-04-08_report-on-pre-legislative-scrutiny-of-the-general-scheme-of-the-assisted-decision-making-capacity-amendment-bill-2021_en.pdf).
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^17]: Joint Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration
    and Youth (2023), *'Report on pre-legislative scrutiny of the
    General Scheme of a Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2023'.* Available
    at:
    [Link](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_children_equality_disability_integration_and_youth/reports/2023/2023-06-28_report-on-pre-legislative-scrutiny-of-the-general-scheme-of-a-child-care-amendment-bill-2023_en.pdf).
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^18]: NDA (2022), *'Overview of UNCRPD Article 13 in Ireland Access to
    Justice',* pp. 5

[^19]: Oireachtas Library & Research Service (2017), *'post-enactment
    scrutiny (PeS) by Parliament'.* Available at:
    [2018-01-08\_spotlight-post-enactment-scrutiny-in-parliament\_en.pdf
    (oireachtas.ie)](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/libraryResearch/2018/2018-01-08_spotlight-post-enactment-scrutiny-in-parliament_en.pdf)
    (Accessed 24 January 2024).

[^20]: International Center for Not-For-Profit Law (2021)
    *'E-Consultation Mechanisms in Legislative and Regulatory
    Decision-Making'.* Available at:
    [E-Consultation-Mechanisms-in-Legislative-Regulatory-Decision-Making-12-Jan-2021-vf.pdf
    (icnl.org)](https://www.icnl.org/wp-content/uploads/E-Consultation-Mechanisms-in-Legislative-Regulatory-Decision-Making-12-Jan-2021-vf.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^21]: International Center for Not-For-Profit Law (2021)
    *'E-Consultation Mechanisms in Legislative and Regulatory
    Decision-Making'.*

[^22]: NDA (2023), *'Customer Communications Toolkit for Services to the
    Public --- A Universal Design',* Available at: [Customer
    Communications Toolkit for the public Service, A Universal Design
    Approach](http://publicservice.universaldesign.ie/media/NDA_Universal_Design_Public_Service_Toolkit.pdf)

[^23]: NDA Independent Assessment of Implementation of the National
    Disability Inclusion Strategy for 2022, pp. 13

[^24]: A. Brysk (2018), *'The Future of Human Rights',* Polity.

[^25]: IHREC (2018), 'Disability and Discrimination in Ireland: Evidence
    from the QNHS Equality Modules 2004, 2010, 2014', Available at:
    [Disability and discrimination in Ireland: evidence from the QNHS
    Equality modules
    (ihrec.ie)](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2018/09/Disability-and-Discrimination.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^26]: IHREC (2023), Annual Report 2022, Available at: [Annual Report
    2022 - IHREC - Irish Human Rights and Equality
    Commission](https://www.ihrec.ie/documents/annual-report-2022/)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^27]: Government of Ireland, *'Programme for a Partnership Government
    (2016)*', pp.104, Available at:
    [programme\_for\_partnership\_government.pdf
    (merrionstreet.ie)](https://merrionstreet.ie/merrionstreet/en/imagelibrary/programme_for_partnership_government.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^28]: Parliamentary Budget Office (2023), *'An Analysis of Equality
    Budgeting Content in the Revised Estimates for Public Services
    2023*', Available at: [An Analysis of Equality Budgeting Content in
    the Revised Estimates for Public Services 2023
    (oireachtas.ie)](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/parliamentaryBudgetOffice/2023/2023-08-04_an-analysis-of-equality-budgeting-content-in-the-revised-estimates-for-public-services-2023_en.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^29]: Parliamentary Budget Office (2023), *'An Analysis of Equality
    Budgeting Content in the Revised Estimates for Public Services
    2023'*, pp. 2.

[^30]: IHREC, *'Discrimination under the Employment Equality Acts'*,
    Available at: [Discrimination under the Employment Equality Acts -
    IHREC - Irish Human Rights and Equality
    Commission](https://www.ihrec.ie/guides-and-tools/human-rights-and-equality-for-employers/what-does-the-law-say/discrimination-under-the-employment-equality-acts/#:~:text=Direct%20discrimination%20is%20when%20a,to%20discriminate%20against%20another%20worker.)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^31]: IHREC (2021), *'Submission on the Review of the Equality Acts'*.
    Available at:
    [IHREC-Submission-on-the-Review-of-the-Equality-Acts.pdf](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/01/IHREC-Submission-on-the-Review-of-the-Equality-Acts.pdf)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024). NDA (2021), *'NDA Submission to the
    Review of Equality Legislation'*. Available at: [NDA Submission to
    the Review of Equality Legislation - National Disability
    Authority](https://nda.ie/publications/nda-submission-to-the-review-of-equality-legislation#:~:text=The%20Government%20will%20draw%20on,recommendations%20arising%20from%20the%20review.)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).

[^32]: NDA Independent Assessment of Implementation of the National
    Disability Inclusion Strategy for 2022, pp. 15.

[^33]: Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data (2021),
    *\'Unpacking Intersectional Approaches to Data\'*. Available at:
    [Unpacking Intersectional Approaches to Data
    (data4sdgs.org)](https://www.data4sdgs.org/resources/unpacking-intersectional-approaches-data)
    (Accessed 08 January 2024).